---
title:      Exception Management in Java
date:       2017-01-04
updated:    2017-01-04
author:     Michel Casabianca
email:      michel.casabianca@gmail.com
id:         142
categories: []
tags:       [java]
lang:       en
toc:        false
---

Here is a short document that describes my view on exceptions management in
Java **command line applications**.

This is a quite different from the case of a library where you should type the
exceptions you throw so that receiver will be able to take appropriate
decisions.

This is also quite différent for web applications where you won't catch
exceptions in `main()` but in a place where you will be able to return
appropriate status code. You would also probably throw exceptions that would
contain status code to return.

<!--more-->

Exception catching policy
-------------------------

You only catch an exception in these situations:

- You can fix the cause of the exception
- You throw another exception with catched exception as cause (you pass catched
  exception as second argument of the raised exception)

You **never** catch an exception if you can't fix it or if you don't throw 
another one. This code is **forbidden**:

```java
try {
    // do something
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("help!");
}
```

Exception propagation policy
----------------------------

An exception that is not fixed must be propagated to calling code. You can do
it by declaring the exception in the method signature. You can also throw a
new exception containing raised exception as the cause.

For instance, if an exception is raised reading configuration file, you might
write following code:

```java
try {
    // load configuration file
} catch (Exception e) {
    throw new ManagedException("Error loading configuration file", e);
}
```

The message of the raised exception will clarify the error and the cause
exception (passed to the constructor of the raised exception) will specify
the cause of the error (*file not found* for instance).

Managed exceptions
------------------

You should print a stack trace only for unexpected exceptions. For instance,
when configuration file is not found, it is not necessary to print a stack
trace, an error message is far better.

In this case, you should throw a managed exception that will carry the error
message, is in the example above.

A *ManagedException* class could look like this:

```java
public class ManagedException
    extends RuntimeException {

    public ManagedException(String message) {
        super(message);
    }

    public ManagedException(String message, Throwable cause) {
        super(message, cause);
    }
}
```

Propagated exceptions management
--------------------------------

Exceptions that are propagated to calling method must be processed somewhere.
There should be only one place in an application where you process these
exceptions. This code should look like:

```java
try {
    // body of the application
} catch (ManagedException e) {
    if (e.getCause() != null) {
        LOGGER.error(e.getMessage() + " : " + e.getCause());
    } else {
        LOGGER.error(e.getMessage());
    }
    System.exit(1);
} catch (Exception e) {
    LOGGER.error("Unexpected error", e);
    System.exit(2);
}
```

Best place for this code is in *main()* method of the program.

Any feedback welcome (in comments)!

*Enjoy!*
